---
layout: post
title: 01 The Unix Shell
---

This lesson introduces the **shell**, also known as the **command
line**. There are many different shells: We are using the
**[bash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bash_(Unix_shell))** shell.

This lesson builds on [An Introduction to the command
line](http://becksteinlab.physics.asu.edu/learning/24/introduction-to-the-command-line)
with [Unix
Basics](http://becksteinlab.physics.asu.edu/pages/unix/IntroUnix/p01_UNIX.html)
and the [Software Carpentry lesson on The Unix
Shell](http://swcarpentry.github.io/shell-novice/).

1. [Background and Motivation](#background-and-motivation)
2. [Tutorial](#tutorial)


## Background and Motivation

As a computational scientist you have one primary tool at your hand: a
computer. And like an experimental scientist, you will have to be able
to interact with it, adjust it, tweak it, fix it, and generally make
it do things that it has never done before.

You are probably used to interacting with a computer via a graphical
user interface ("GUI") — windows, browsers, a mouse or touch
screen. Although convenient, this limits you to the interactions
designed into the interface. To get more out of a machine you have to
talk to it more directly.

We will interact with the computer using the text-based terminal
through a so-called *command line interface* (CLI). The user types
input commands; the commands are read, executed, and output is
printed. The program responsible for doing this is called the
**shell** (because it "encloses" the operating system to simplify user
interaction with it).

The shell is a program like any other but it's primary purpose is to
run other programs; most of the input "commands" are in fact other
programs. The shell is very good at working with the file system
(files and directories), combining multiple existing tools in powerful
ways, and automating tasks. On a
[Unix](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix)-like operating systems
(typically used for high-performance computing) using the shell is a
very powerful (and essential) way to interact with the computer.

## Tutorial

### Accessing the shell

* On a typical **Linux** system you open an application called
  *terminal* or *xterm* or *kterm* (or similar).

* On **Mac OS X** you open *Terminal.app* (in the *Utilities* folder in
  *Applications*).

* On Windows we use *Git Bash*: Find it in the Program menu under *All
  Programs/Git/Git Bash*

You should be greeted by the *prompt*, which can look like this

~~~
$
~~~

with the cursor as an underline or block showing that you can
type. Often your prompt is more elaborate, e.g.

~~~
dvader@deathstar.empire.gov  ~$
~~~

Type

{% highlight bash %}
whoami
{% endhighlight %}

and hit enter. You should see your username being printed to the
screen.

Type 

{% highlight bash %}
cd
{% endhighlight %}

and hit enter to begin the lesson. From now on, input will just be
shown and you should enter it.


## Navigating Files and Directories

### Commands
* `pwd` (print working directory)
* `ls` (list directory)
* `cd` (change directory)

Commands generally take *arguments* (what to operate on, required) and
*options* (modify the standard behavior, optional).

{% highlight bash %}
command_name -v -o optarg --long-opt  arg1 arg2
{% endhighlight %}

Often, omitting the argument also works and a default is assumed. You
can learn more about commands with the help function (try running just
with option `-h` or `--help` or on Linux/Mac OS X, `man
command_name`).


### Paths

A *path* consists of *directory names* separated by forward-slashes
"`/`" and possibly a final *file name*. 

* `/` (the actual name of the "root" directory)
* `/home/dvader` or `/Users/dvader`
* `/usr/bin/nano`
* `books.txt`
* `/Users/dvader/Documents/deathstar/weaknesses.pdf`
* `Documents/deathstar/weaknesses.pdf`

Paths starting with `/` are called *absolute paths*; anything else is
a *relative* path, starting from the current working directory (check
with `pwd`).

### Moving around

Assume user dvader has the following directory layout in his *home
directory* `/Users/dvader`:

~~~
/Users/dvader/
	     Documents/
		      deathstar/
			       weaknesses.pdf
			       electrical_bill.dat
		      jedi_jokes/
	     data/
		 planets.dat
		 bases
~~~
                      
If he executes the `cd` command

{% highlight bash %}
cd /Users/dvader/Documents/deathstar
{% endhighlight %}

then he will have moved to the `deathstar` directory.

The `cd` command took an *argument*, the directory to go to.

{% highlight bash %}
pwd
{% endhighlight %}

will print

~~~
/Users/dvader/Documents/deathstar
~~~
{: .output}

If he runs

{% highlight bash %}
ls
{% endhighlight %}

he will see 

~~~ 
electrical_bill.dat  weaknesses.pdf
~~~
{: .output}

In order to get to the `data` directory he could use the command `cd
/Users/dvader/data` but instead he uses the *special directory* `..`
(which means "the directory above this one"):

{% highlight bash %}
cd ../../data
{% endhighlight %}

(Use the `TAB` key while typing: *autocompletion* is one of the best
features of the shell! The other great interactive feature is the
history: try using the cursor-up and -down keys.)

A second special directory is `.` ("this directory"). `.` and `..`
are understood by all commands.

### Activity

* What does the following sequence of commands show?

  {% highlight bash %}
  cd
ls -a
  {% endhighlight %}

* Go to the `bin` directory that is located in the `usr` directory,
which itself is located in the root directory. List the files there.


### Tips to make your life easy

* Use the shell's `TAB` completion and up/down to get commands that
  you already typed. (Also try out `Control`+`R` (`^R`) to search
  through your shell *history*)
* Use `cd ..` to go up, `cd ../..` to go up twice etc.
* Use `cd -` to go to *the previous directory I was in* (only works
  for `cd`).
* Use the tilde character `~` for your home directory, e.g. `cd
  ~/Documents` is equivalent to `cd /Users/dvader/Documents`.


## Copy, rename, delete

* `mkdir` (make directory)
* `cp` (copy file, `cp -r` copy recursively, including directories)
* `mv` (move, i.e. rename)
* `rmdir` (remove empty directory)
* `rm` (remove file, `rm -r` remove recursively (**dangerous!**))


