---
layout: post
title: 08 Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs)
---

Most physical phenomena are ultimately described by a relationship
between changing quantities, resulting in differential equations. If
such an equation only contains one independent variable (such as time)
and hence only total derivatives (and no partial derivatives) we
classify it as an
**[ordinary differential equation](http://mathworld.wolfram.com/OrdinaryDifferentialEquation.html)**
(**ODE**). An ODE of order $$n$$ contains no derivatives higher than
the $$n$$-th derivative:

$$
F(t, y, y^{(1)},  \dots, y^{(n)}) = 0
$$

The *dependent* variable $$y = y(t)$$ is a function of the
*independent variable* $$t$$ and $$y^{(n)} = \frac{d^{n}y}{dt^{n}}$$
is the $$n$$-th derivative with respect to $$t$$. A *linear ODE* only
contains first powers of $$y$$ or its derivatives. A *non-linear ODE*
may contain higher powers. There often exist methods to solve linear
ODEs analytically but this is impossible for most non-linear
ODEs. Solutions of an ODE are fixed by the initial conditions[^1],
e.g., $$y_0 = y(t_{0})$$ and similar for all higher derivatives. For
an ODE of order $$n$$, exactly $$n$$ initial conditions are needed.

Using ODE integration algorithms (*integrators*) we can solve linear
*and* non-linear ODEs of any order *numerically*. The basic idea is to
start with the initial conditions and then propagate $$y$$ for a small
step $$h$$ to numerically compute $$y(t_0 + h)$$ and all its
derivatives. By repeating the process, one *extrapolates* from the
initial condition to any "later" value of $$t$$.

We will first study the simplest integrator, the *Euler* algorithm, and
then look at a more robust class of integrators, the *Runge-Kutta*
schemes.

The Jupyter notebook
[08_ODEs.ipynb](http://nbviewer.jupyter.org/format/slides/github/ASU-CompMethodsPhysics-PHY494/PHY494-resources/blob/master/08_ODEs/08_ODEs-students-1.ipynb#/)
contains the lecture notes and skeleton code for in-class problem
exercises.[^2]

Additional resources:

* _Computational Physics_: Chapter **9**
* [scipy.integrate](http://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/integrate.html)
  for high performance integration algorithms for Python, in
  particular see
  [scipy.integrate.odeint()](http://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.integrate.odeint.html)
  and
  [scipy.integrate.ode()](http://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.integrate.ode.html#scipy.integrate.ode).
*  Weisstein, Eric
  W. ["Ordinary Differential Equation."](http://mathworld.wolfram.com/OrdinaryDifferentialEquation.html)
  From MathWorld — A Wolfram Web Resource.
* _[Numerical Recipes in C](http://apps.nrbook.com/c/index.html)_, WH
  Press, SA Teukolsky, WT Vetterling, BP Flannery. 2nd
  ed, 2002. Cambridge University Press. Chapter **16**.


------------------------------------------------------------

#### Footnotes

[^1]:

     Solutions to ODEs can also be restricted by *boundary conditions*
     (values of the solution on the domain boundary) but this leads to
     difficult Eigenvalue problems and will not be considered in this
     lesson.
	 
[^2]:

     As usual, `git pull` the resources repository to get a local copy
     of the notebook. Then copy the notebook into your work directory
     in order to complete the exercises.
