---
layout: post
title: 04 Debugging Primer
---

Code contains errors (also known as **bugs**).

* [syntax and language errors](#syntax-and-language) (easy, relatively
  speaking) and errors that raise exceptions under certain conditions
* [logic errors](#logic-errors), corner cases, [edge cases](#edge-cases) (hard)

Work through this page and then see [More Resources](#more-resources)
at the end for more advanced material.

## General strategy

1. Be clear about what your code *ought* to do: what are the inputs,
   what are the outputs? What do you *expect* to get?

2. If you get an *exception* with a *stack trace*: look at the code
   that is referenced.

3. Output intermediate values (e.g., `print()` calls). Compare what
   you get to what you expect. Run the program in your head to
   understand what values you should see.

4. Make one change and re-run. Is the bug fixed? If not, repeat.


## Helpful strategies

* Have a terminal and an editor open, side by side, so that you can
  quickly run the modified code. (Don't forget to save changes before
  running the code...)

* Prototype small code pieces interactively in `ipython`.

* Run programs inside `ipython` using the `%run` magic function:

  {% highlight python %}
  %run hello.py
  {% endhighlight %}

  The advantage is that now you can *examine variables interactively*
  inside the interpreter.[^1]

## Activity: Fix as many bugs as possible!

### Syntax and language

Print the numbers 0 to 9:
{% highlight python %}
fro num in range(10):
    print(num)
{% endhighlight %}

Print the squares of the numbers 0 to 9:
{% highlight python %}
for num in range(10):
    x = num**2
     print(x)
print("Done") 
{% endhighlight %}

Print "error" for input 0:
{% highlight python %}
x = float(input("Enter non-zero number --> "))
if x = 0:
   print("ERROR: number cannot be 0") 
{% endhighlight %}

Define the sinc-function $$\mathrm{sinc}(x) = \sin(x)/x$$:
{% highlight python %}
def sinc(x):
   return sin(x)/x

print(sinc(3.145))
{% endhighlight %}


### Edge cases

The sinc function is defined for all real numbers
{% highlight python %}
import math
def sinc(x):
   return math.sin(x)/x
{% endhighlight %}

but this implementation is incomplete.

1. find values for which our function does not produce the correct
   result
2. fix it
3. BONUS: plot `sinc(x)` for values from -10 to 10 in steps of 0.2. 


Slicing and list building (Hint: prototype...). Create a list of
values -10, -9.8, -9.6, ..., -0.2, 0, 0.2, ..., 10.
{% highlight python %}
h = 0.2
x = [-10 + i*h for i in range(100)]
{% endhighlight %}


### Logic errors

Create a list of squares of the first 20 natural numbers (1,
2, ..., 20) [^2]:
{% highlight python %}
squares = []
for n in range(1, 20):
   s = n*n
   print(n, s)

squares.append(s)
print("Done")
{% endhighlight %}


Calculate the position of an object in free fall as a function of time
and store time points (in 1-s intervals) and positions in two arrays
(for plotting):[^3]

{% highlight python %}
g = -9.81
t, h, tmax = 1., 0., 10.

times, positions = [], []
while t <= tmax:
   x = 0.5 * g * t * t
   times.append(t)
   positions.append(x)
   t += h

print(times)
print(values)
{% endhighlight %}


## More resources

* Software Carpentry's lesson on
  [Errors and Exceptions](http://swcarpentry.github.io/python-novice-inflammation/07-errors/)
* [Testing](http://katyhuff.github.io/python-testing/) by Katy Huff
* [Scipy lecture notes: Debugging](http://www.scipy-lectures.org/advanced/debugging/)
  by Gaël Varoquaux (advanced level)


------------------------------------------------------------

#### Footnotes ####

[^1]:

    Inside `ipython` you can also
    [run the Python debugger](https://ipython.org/ipython-doc/3/interactive/tutorial.html#debugging)
    using the `%pdb` magic, but this is a more advanced topic.

[^2]:

    At least two errors are hidden here.

[^3]:

    Just in case: To stop a running Python program, press CONTROL and C at the same
    time (`control + c`).
