---
layout: post
title: 16 Partial Differential Equations (PDEs)
---

Most physical phenomena are ultimately described by a relationship between changing quantities. If only a single quantity such as time is changing, [Ordinary Differential Equations]({{site.baseurl}}{% post_url 2019-02-19-10_ODEs %}) (ODEs) result. However, as soon as more than a single quantity varies independently from the other ones, [partial differential equations](http://mathworld.wolfram.com/PartialDifferentialEquation.html) (**PDEs**) have to be solved.

For example, a scalar field $$U(x, y)$$ admits the general PDE

$$
A(x, y)\frac{\partial^2 U}{\partial x^2} +
2B(x, y)\frac{\partial^2 U}{\partial x \partial y} +
C(x, y)\frac{\partial^2 U}{\partial y^2} + 
D(x, y)\frac{\partial U}{\partial x} +
E(x, y)\frac{\partial U}{\partial y} +
F(x, y) = 0 
$$

For notational convenience, partial derivatives are often written in subscript notation, so the same general equation reads

$$
A(x, y) U_{xx} +
2B(x, y) U_{xy} +
C(x, y) U_{yy} + 
D(x, y) U_{x} +
E(x, y) U_{y} +
F(x, y) = 0.
$$



## Classes of second-order PDEs

Second-order PDEs (highest partial derivatives are second order, such as $$U_{xz}$$ or $$U_{tt}$$) are ubiquitous in physics and can be classified as

* *elliptic* PDEs (discriminant $$AC - B^2 > 0$$, second derivatives of all variables and all with the same sign, e.g., Poisson's equation $$\nabla^2 U(x, y, z)  = U_{xx} + U_{yy} + U_{zz} = -4\pi\rho(x,y,z)$$);
* *parabolic* PDEs ($$AC - B^2 = 0$$, second order derivative of one variable and first order derivative of the other one, e.g., the heat equation $$\nabla^2 U(x, y, z, t) - a \frac{\partial U}{\partial t} = 0$$);
* *hyperbolic* PDEs ($$AC - B^2 < 0$$, second derivatives of all variables with the opposite sign, e.g. wave equation $$\nabla^2 U(x, y, z, t) - c^{-2} \frac{\partial^2 U}{\partial t^2} = 0$$).

## Boundary conditions

PDEs are more complicated than ODEs. General solutions of PDEs involve arbitrary functions and additional *[boundary conditions](http://mathworld.wolfram.com/BoundaryConditions.html)* (values or derivatives of the solution $$U(x,y)$$ on the boundary of the problem domain) have to be specified to obtain a specific solution (in addition to any *initial conditions*).

* *Dirichlet boundary conditions* prescribe the value of the solution on a surrounding closed surface.
* *Neumann boundary conditions* specify the value of the normal derivative on the surrounding surface.
* *Cauchy boundary conditions* set both the value and the normal derivative on the surrounding closed surface (i.e., both Dirichlet and Neumann boundary conditions are imposed).
* *Robin boundary conditions* specify that a weighted sum of Dirichlet and Neumann boundary conditions have to have a given value on the boundary.

Often, no analytic solutions can be found or the analytic solutions are unwieldy. PDEs can be solved numerically, though. However, different types of PDEs require customized algorithms.

## Solving PDEs numerically

We will look at various [finite difference]({{site.baseurl}}{% post_url 2019-02-14-09_Differentiation %}) schemes (both explicit and implicit) to solve the different classes of PDEs.

The movies show how the solutions of simple electrostatic problems
relax to the converged solution (using successive over-relaxation
with the Gauss-Seidel algorithm.)

<video width="350.0" height="350.0" controls autoplay loop>
<source type="video/quicktime" src="{{site.baseurl}}/{{site.movies}}/wire_SOR_3d.mov" />
  Your browser does not support the video tag. You can find the video
  file at [{{site.baseurl}}/{{site.movies}}/wire_SOR_3d.mov]({{site.baseurl}}/{{site.movies}}/wire_SOR_3d.mov) .
</video>

<video width="350.0" height="350.0" controls autoplay loop>
<source type="video/quicktime" src="{{site.baseurl}}/{{site.movies}}/dipole_wire_SOR_3d.mov" />
  Your browser does not support the video tag. You can find the video
  file at [{{site.baseurl}}/{{site.movies}}/dipole_wire_SOR_3d.mov]({{site.baseurl}}/{{site.movies}}/dipole_wire_SOR_3d.mov) .
</video>



## Class material

1. [16_PDEs-1.ipynb]({{site.nbviewer.resources}}/16_PDEs/16_PDEs-1.ipynb)
   [^1]:
   Poisson's and Laplace's equation: Background
   ([board notes on PDEs (PDF)]({{site.resources.fileurl}}/16_PDEs/16_PDEs-1-LectureNotes.pdf)),
   Gauss-Seidel algorithm, problems:
   [16_PDEs-1-Students.ipynb]({{site.nbviewer.resources}}/16_PDEs/16_PDEs-1-Students.ipynb) [^2]
2. [16_PDEs-2.ipynb]({{site.nbviewer.resources}}/16_PDEs/16_PDEs-2.ipynb)
   [^1]:
   fast Jacobi, Gauss-Seidel and Successive Over Relaxation algorithms
   (using NumPy array operations, see
   [board notes on numpyfied Poisson solvers
   (PDF)]({{site.resources.fileurl}}/16_PDEs/16_PDEs-2-LectureNotes.pdf))
   and how to replace slow Python loops with fastnumpy array
   operations ([numpy_arrays.ipynb]({{site.nbviewer.resources}}/16_PDEs/numpy_arrays.ipynb)),
   Poisson equation, charge density:
   [16_PDEs-2-Students.ipynb]({{site.nbviewer.resources}}/16_PDEs/16_PDEs-2-Students.ipynb) [^2]
3. When plotting arrays of data with
   [matplotlib](https://matplotlib.org), one sooner or later one needs
   to use the
   [`numpy.meshgrid()`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/numpy/reference/generated/numpy.meshgrid.html)
   function which "returns coordinate matrices from coordinate
   vectors"---most users find this function mystifying. The notebook
   [meshgrid.ipynb]({{site.nbviewer.resources}}/16_PDEs/meshgrid.ipynb)
   makes a bit clearer, _what_ `meshgrid` does and why it is useful.


#### Additional resources  ####

* _Computational Physics_, Ch **19--23**
* _[Partial differential equation](http://www.scholarpedia.org/article/Partial_differential_equation)_, Andrei D. Polyanin et al. (2008), Scholarpedia, 3(10):4605. doi: [10.4249/scholarpedia.4605](http://doi.org/doi:10.4249/scholarpedia.4605)
* _[Numerical Recipes in C](http://apps.nrbook.com/c/index.html)_, WH
  Press, SA Teukolsky, WT Vetterling, BP Flannery. 2nd
  ed, 2002. Cambridge University Press. Chapter **19**.


--------

#### Footnotes

[^1]:

     Notebook will be posted after class; in the mean time look at the
     student notebook.

[^2]:

     As usual, `git pull` the resources repository
     [{{site.resources.shortname}}]({{site.resources.url}}) to get a
     local copy of the notebook. Then **copy the notebook and all other
     code into your work directory** in order to complete the exercises.
